# zafeiriadis_cox_2020522
Exercise cox – history of sound art

[00:27:31 – 00:35:40](https://youtu.be/hh_5_CAySXY?t=1650)

&nbsp;&nbsp;Neuhaus  begun  installing  various  sound  pieces,  installations  as  they  called  them,  in  stairwells,  in  subway  stations,  in  swimming  pools,  in  elevators,  and  filled  them  generally  with  these  lush  drones,  with  phased  clicks  or  other  sounds  that  were  unobtrusive  but  subtly  transformative.  In  1973,  he  happened  upon  a  subway  event  on  a  pedestrian  island,  in  Times  square,  in  new  York  city  and  was  struck  by  a  desire  to  use  this  cavernous  space  as  a  resonant  chamber  for  his  sound  work.  Four  years  of  arduous  negotiation  with  the  metropolitan  transit  authority  and  Con  Edison  ensued,  until  Neuhaus  finally  received  permission  to  climb  down  into  the  ventshaft  and  install  a  loud  speaker  and  some  homemade  electronic  sound  generators  that  he  Jerry-rigged  city's  lighting  with.  Neuhaus  built  the  sound by  ear,  listening  carefully  to  the  sonic  environment  layering  frequencies  and  tamburs,  in  the  way  a  painter  layers  color  and  shaping  mass,  like  a  sculptor  working  with  invisible  material.  As  in  all  Neuhaus's  installations,  the  sound  was  to  be,  as  he  liked  to  say,  almost  plausible,  almost  right  for  the  place  but  almost  not  right  too.  Also,  a  bit  out  of  place,  so,  a  slight  dislocation  in  our  old  topography.  The  result,  which  is  still  there  today,  was  a  dense  drone,  that  as  Neuhaus  described  it,  resembled  the  after-ring  of  large  bells,  a  sound  that  summoned  the  restless  clamour  all  around  Times  square  but  also  bathed  it  in  a  kind  of  consistent  aural  hue.  So,  this  piece  was  launched  in  1977,  it  was  there  24  hours  a  day,  during  365  days  a  year,  more  or  less,  because  it  constantly  broke  down  (he  was  going  there  to  fix  it)  until  he  finally  left  for  Europe  in  1992,  and  he  was  sick  of  fixing  it,  so  he  just  let  it  be.  Then  in  2002,  the  Dia  foundation  revived  the  piece  and  set  it  there  in  the  environment  where  it  used  to  be  and  it's  run  ever  since,  so,  it's  still  one  of  New  York  city's  great  pieces  of  public  art,  so  I  am  just  going  to  play  the  briefest  clip.  I  am  going  to  play  two  clips,  this  and  the  next  that  are  just  pulled  from  youtube,  so  they're  as  good  a  recording  of  unrecordable  stuff  as  you  could  find  because  really,  being  in  this  environment  and  experiencing  it,  in  the  way  you  experience  it  with  your  body,  is  a  very  different  kind  of  thing  than  watching  it  play  but  anyway  let's  hear  it. So  Neuhaus  coined  the  phrase  sound  installation,  but  he  was  not  alone  in  developing  ongoing  sights  specific  sound  environments  during  the  1960s  and  70s.  As  early  as  1962,  the  minimalist  composer  LaMonte  Young  began  to   envision  what  he  called  a  dream  house,  a  space  that,  as  he  put  it,  will  allow  music, which  after  a  year,  10  years,  100  years  of  constant  sound,  would  not  only  be  a  real  living  organism  with  a  life  and  a  tradition  of  its  own  but  one  with  a  capacity  to  propel  itself  by  its  own  momentum.  This  music  may  play  without  stopping  for  thousands  of  years.  Again  this  idea  that  sound  is  this  kind  of  continuous  thing that  we,  in  a  certain  sense,  listen  to  and  enter  into  but  in  a  certain  way  don't  control.  This  project,  this  dream  house  project,  as  it  was  eventually  installed,  was  first  presented  for  two  weeks,  in  July  1969,  at  a  gallery  in  Munich,  where  Young's   oscillators  generated  a  field  of  sign  tones  fluctuating  around  50Htz,  which  in  Europe  is  the  utility  frequency  and  what  Young  called  the  basic  drone  of  the  city.  Zazeela,  Marian  Zazeela,  his  partner,  projected  pure  light  frequencies  at  metal  mobiles  which  she  described  as  self  luminous,  colored  bodies,  freely  suspended  in  an  atmosphere  of  continuously  moving  telegraphic  strokes.  A  decade  later  the  Dia  art  foundation  again  funded  a,  what  they  thought  of  as  a  permanent  dream  house,  in  the  former  New  York  mercantile  exchange  building,  in  lower  Manhattan  and  this  installation  run  for  six  years  until  disputes  within  the  foundation  led  to  its  funding  being  eliminated  and  it  then  moved  to  the  church  street  location  where  it  exists  today,  right  above  Young  and  Zazeela's  apartment  and  Dia has  recently  purchased  this  piece  and  it's  occasionally  installed  in  their  Chelsea  space  in  New  York.  So,  while  Neuhaus's  installations  unobtrusively  mark  and  color  public  space,  Young  and  Zazeela's  dream  houses  are  overpowering  presentations  of  sound  in  interior  spaces  that  allow  the  artist  very  precise  control  over  frequencies  and  their  psychoacoustic  effects. Both  Neuhaus  and  Young  worked  with  drones  but  whereas  Neuhaus  built  his  sounds  intuitively,  Young's  were  elaborately  constructed  through  a  curious  combination  of  mathematical  precision  and  ancient  Vedic  philosophy,  with  the  principle  that  the  world  is  sound,  this  famous  phrase  Nadabrahma.  This  is  the  title  of  a  composition  that  currently  plays  at  the  dream  house.  I  am  not  going  to  read  it  but  you  get  the  picture.  It's  very  elaborately,  sort  of  mathematically  constructed  and  yet  also  has  this  sense  of  getting  at  this  notion  of  the  world  as  fundamentally  sonic,  and  we  human  beings  as  inhabiting  that  world.  And  I'll  just  again  play  you  a  kind  of  somehow  lousy  but  as  good  as  any,  clip  from  the  dream  house.
